https://issues.redhat.com/browse/ACM-11346 (#7355)
open-cluster-management/rhacm-docs: observability/use_observability.adoc

----

. To access the `rbac-query-proxy` route with your {ocp-short} OAuth access token, run the following command to get the token. The token must be associated with a user or service account, which has permission to get namespaces:

+
[source,bash]
----
MY_TOKEN=$(oc whoami --show-token)
----

. To access the `openshift-ingress` route, get the default CA certificate and store the content of the `tls.crt` key in a local file. Run the following command:

+
[source,bash]
----
oc -n openshift-ingress get secret router-certs-default -o jsonpath="{.data.tls\.crt}" | base64 -d > ca.crt
----

. To access an endpoint of the default CA certificate from your hub cluster through mutual TLS, which verifies the identities of both parties in a network connection, create the `proxy-byo-ca` TLS secret with the following command:

+
[source,bash]
----
oc -n open-cluster-management-observability create secret tls proxy-byo-ca --cert ./ca.crt --key ./ca.key
----

. To query metrics from the API, run the following command: 

+
[source,bash]
----
curl --cacert ./ca.crt -H "Authorization: Bearer {TOKEN}" https://{PROXY_ROUTE_URL}/api/v1/query?query={QUERY_EXPRESSION}
----
+

> *Note:* The `QUERY_EXPRESSION` is the standard Prometheus query expression. For example, query the metrics `cluster_infrastructure_provider` by replacing the URL in the previously mentioned command with the following URL: `https://{PROXY_ROUTE_URL}/api/v1/query?query=cluster_infrastructure_provider`. For more details, see link:https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/querying/basics/[Querying Prometheus].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Note:* The `QUERY_EXPRESSION` is the standard Prometheus query expression. For example, query the metrics `cluster_infrastructure_provider` by replacing the URL in the previous command with the following URL: `https://{PROXY_ROUTE_URL}/api/v1/query?query=cluster_infrastructure_provider`. For more details, see link:https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/querying/basics/[Querying Prometheus].
```

  namespace: open-cluster-management-observability
type: Opaque
stringData:
  ep.yaml: | <1>
    url: http://victoriametrics:8428/api/v1/write <2>
    http_client_config: <3>
      basic_auth: <4>
        username: test <5>
        password: test <6>
      tls_config: <7>
        secret_name: <8>
        ca_file_key: <9>
        cert_file_key: <10>
        key_file_key: <11>
        insecure_skip_verify: <12>
----
<1> The `ep.yaml` parameter is the key of the content and is used in the `MultiClusterObservability` custom resource in next step. Currently, Observability supports exporting metrics to endpoints without any security checks, with basic authentication or with `tls` enablement. View the following tables for a full list of supported parameters:
<2> The `url` parameter is required and the URL for the external endpoint. Enter the value as a string.

> <3> The `http_client_config` parameter is optional and is the advanced configuration for the HTTP client.

Reviewer: I'm OK with this call out list but what do you think of a table, considering that we need to mention optional or required for all of these anyway? Might look a little cleaner in a table

Author: I used a table before but it seemed disruptive and the table seems like it would be in a concept rather than a task. It's so much info in this file. We should definitely create new files for some of these sub topics in the future.
